This is May 16, and we are in the Hagler Center, and I
have the pleasure and honor of chatting with Eddie
Joe Davis, who is the exact title now? President of
the Texas A&M Development Foundation. Texas A&M
Foundation. Texas A&M Foundation. Okay, now
we're going to cut this off and see if it works.
Because someone in the future may listen to this or
read it and not know your background, let's begin
with your talking about where you grew up, family,
what was the family income, where was it, and so
forth. That was probably typical of most students
coming to Texas A&M in the early 60s. And I grew up on
a little farming ranch, 160 acres,
inherited from my grandfather, who homesteaded
with the objective of obtaining a quarter section
for each child. And so my dad was the only one of
about six or seven children who decided to stay and
farm it. And he farmed all the rest of the quarter
sections of the children who went to California
and other places. This is where? Clay County. Went
to high school or to all school in Henrietta,
although it was a little place called the
Stanfield Ranch, which was put together by
Stanfield brothers and then broken up into
parcels and sold in the late 1800s.
they would have gone to school at Stanfield except
they closed the one through eight grade school the
year before I started school and then wrote a
yellow dog school bus well what was between
probably 23 and 25 miles a day to Henrietta to
school Raised cotton, wheat, maize or milo were
few cattle. Most of everything we had we produced
our own food, milk, meat. still was in an
environment sort of at the last of the end of an era,
I guess, in that we would move around the little
community and have hog killing in the fall, go from
one house to the next. And we also, I guess we first
got running water when I was about, oh, about first
grade, something like that.
The one-holer was near the chicken house, so it
wouldn't smell, you understand. That is, the
chicken took, you know, dominated. It was a pretty
Spartan, sparse upbringing. They had two older
brothers, both much older, 11 and 17 years older,
so they were more like uncles and brothers. My
theory was that my dad always wanted to have a hoe
hand at home, so he spread them out, and that was the
place that we began. You've told me in other
conversations, I believe, about your father kind
of assigning you a few acres that if you wanted to go
to college, you work that and that income.
Describe that arrangement. He and I basically
farmed 160 plus, probably another 500
cultivated, and we ran cows on about another 300
acres. So we sharecropped and leased, and it kept
us pretty busy. But the summer, I guess it was
really the spring before my first year in college,
and frankly, I didn't yet know where I was going to
go at that point. It was a little different in those
days. He pointed out to me a terrace and a fence row
that if you took the circumference around that, it
was about 13 acres. And he said, you, like you
always do, help farm the whole thing. But whatever
we make on that 13 acres of cotton is what you'll
have to go to school on. Well, we made $100 an acre.
So I had $1,300 to get me through my first year at
A&M. And it was right on target. It was just about
what it took. Plus, the other part of the story is we
were sitting on the front porch shelling
black-eyed peas probably around the 4th of July
and my dad had gone to the mailbox it rained the
night before so we couldn't work normal work so we
were shelling peas he walks to the mailbox heads
back up and I noticed a little extra spring in his
step when he gets back to the front porch hands me an
envelope in which I am told that I've received an
opportunity award scholarship and that was the
decision point frankly for i mean i had wanted to go
to a m but didn't know that i could afford it where
had you heard about a m and what primarily a couple
of sources one my ag teacher was a a m graduate he was
a non-traditional aggie in that he came to A&M
after World War II as a veteran and had finished
school. And so he wasn't, you know, he wasn't a part
of the Corps. In fact, he really didn't know a lot
about the Corps. Also a fellow named Penrose B.
Metcalf, who you might have heard of. Penrose
Metcalf was a great friend of people in the Future
Farmers of America. I was a district, you know,
local district regional and then state FFA
officer in the FFA and Mr. Metcalf would haul us
boys around try to teach us a little bit about what
it was like to be in the grown-up world. And he
talked fondly about us going to college, which we
hadn't all thought about very much. And A&M was
always on his mind. And then I had a fellow that was a
class ahead of me in Henrietta that came here.
Again, sort of similar background that I knew, not
real well, named Eddie Shear. And Eddie was a
contact for me down here. So those are the things.
Now my dad always admired A&M because of the
extension service. You know, they helped him with
his bull worm problems and all of the other things
that you endure and of course all of the ag
community were familiar with A&M. So it was a
natural link. Had you been to visit the campus? I
came my senior year in high school and spent the
night with some kids in the Corps. It wasn't an
organized event in those days. Frankly, that was
probably not a great motivator. I mean, it was
okay, but the night I was here, it was dreary and
rainy and dark and dank, and I wasn't sure that this
was the kind of place for me, but I was, again,
remained convinced that it was a good school and
everybody thought highly of it. As far as you know,
when did you apply? When did you start filling out
some papers? It was probably late spring, my
senior year in high school. i remember a friend of
mine and i staying up and studying for quote the sat
or act or whatever it was in those days you didn't
have to have it to get in excuse me there wasn't a
required score you had to take the test so i guess
they were trying to see you know kind of where you
were and then the the final decision was that that
endowed or not endowed but the opportunity award
how much was it 125
I think it was $250 a year, you got $125 a semester.
And then I had a valedictory scholarship, which
allowed the tuition to be waived and my lab fees to
be paid. So with all that combined, it was pretty
substantial relative to the cost. So you were
first in a class of how many? 33. 33. 11 boys and 22
girls, I might add. Pretty good ratio. All right,
as a sidelight, why that 2 to 1 male-female? I have
no idea. Was there just a bigger dropout rate of the
boys? Probably. You know, when you think about it,
I mean, I had a first cousin who was very close to me
who dropped out after his sophomore year, and it
was pretty common in those days. uh... college was
uh... sort of on the horizon not very many people
thought about it did you have any idea before you
got here what your major might be no uh... in fact
uh... my mother and dad brought me down to after
this arrival of the scholarship There was some
information in there about you ought to come down
before classes begin to meet with, you know, the
college. And I did, I was thinking probably
agriculture, but I didn't know what. And so we
arranged to pass through College Station on the
way to Galvin. a couple of days at Galveston,
meeting some relatives, and stop off here and met
with Dr. R.C. Potts, Dick Potts. And he was over in
the old heap building, the one on, now I guess, I
don't know what it's called, but it was the dairy
science, and always smelled like lab chemicals.
Anyway, Dr. Potts' office was up on the third floor
and we were sitting there and he looked at my high
school transcript and said, well, Eddie Joe, you
need to be an ag journalism major. And I said, well,
Dr. Potts, what's that? And he said, well, you've
got, obviously you like English and you can write.
You've got good grades in high school English. You
know, you've got this background in agriculture.
It's a great program. A lot of future in this.
People can, you know, you can do a lot of different
things. He was a real promoter of agricultural
journalism. So I said, hey, sounds good to me. And
that's how I started and that's how I finished.
Now, there was one other major influence And that
is that Anderson Clayton gave a $1,000
scholarship in the junior and senior year to
someone in ag journalism. Well, I had my eyes on
that, and I needed the money. So I thought, well, if
I can do well enough in the freshman and sophomore
year, I might be able to latch on to that
scholarship. And that was the motivator. And so
you came briefly early in the summer? Sometime,
probably, I would say July. uh was there other than
meeting dr potts did you carry any impression of
the campus away there was a there was a general
meeting in the uh i think it was on the second floor
of the chemistry building in a you know lord not the
old large general lecture hall but in large
probably a hundred student lecture hall And it was
sort of an orientation. At the end of it, by the way,
you picked your core outfit, quote. Actually, it
was picked for you because what they did in those
days is they assigned you by major. And as an ag
major, I had the choice of if I wanted to be in the Air
Force, I could be in Squadron 6. If I wanted to be in
the Army, I could be in C1 or D1. Well, I didn't know
what one or the other meant. So I get in line. They
split you off. And they ask you, you want to be Army
or Air Force? You tell them, and they put you in the
outfit. those were interesting places because of
the mix of the people, mostly old country boys. And
it was a different experience. I mean, the people
weren't different, but putting them together in
that kind of an arrangement was different. But
that's the only other memory I have about the
place. There was no advanced placement test.
There was no hooping and hollering and all the good
stuff that they do these days, it was pretty get
them in, get them out, we got better things to do.
Alright, so then you go home and then come back. Oh,
and I did sign up for fish camp. Oh, okay. Yeah, and
that was one of the other things you did while you
were here. Again, not quite knowing what that was.
but being encouraged by gordon gay i think was the
person that as i recall was the person that really
motivated everybody to sign up for fish camp who
was you know the old uh director of the y director of
the ymca and the campus minister uh describe fish
camp as as you uh understood it Well, it was really
not a bad experience. I met a lot of people at fish
camp, just like happens today, that sort of remain
your relationships throughout your college
experience. A friend of mine named Barney Fudge
from Burke Burnett, Texas, and I were in the same
cabin at fish camp. And neither one of us knew we
were although we had played sports against each
other in high school, we didn't know we were both
coming here. So Barney and I formed a fast. And
there's an interesting end to that story, which we
can save until later, with regard to the senior
year. And Fish Camp was then held? Palestine. At
the Methodist? Right, Methodist Assembly. And
did you, was it a worthy event? At worthwhile
investment of time? When you're 18 years old, it's
pretty hard to judge. No, but as you look. What was
or wasn't. Oh, yeah, I thought it was, again, it
wasn't nearly as organized nor as
tradition-bound. What it really was in those days
was a way to help you think about transitioning
away from home uh there was a lot of spiritual based
uh discussion again gordon gay was was a principal
in it and it was probably more being thoughtful
about uh not losing all of your values and and
leaving home and forgetting home and and then of
course a lot of things about a m but not in the sense
that you're taught today that i at least from my
observation about the rah-rah tradition
oriented. It was much more of a quiet, a little
simpler activity. All right, so you go back home
and then come back. No, didn't go back home. Came
here, went to fish camp, and then came back from
fish camp. How did you get here for that fish camp
trip? Well, I was a rare person. My dad had bought
the first new automobile we ever owned in 1957. We
had a pretty nice wheat crop. He bought a 57 Ford.
the cheapest model ever made okay i mean it was it
had no chrome it had no in fact we had it suited out
with those clear plastic seats as soon as we got it
out of the dealership it cost 1900 never never
forget it in the fall in the fall of 1963 my dad
bought a pickup truck because he was tired of
hauling things around in that 57 ford and Told me I
could bring it to A&M. So I was one of the rare
characters. In my outfit of freshman, there were
three cars, about probably 30, 35 kids. So I drove
down here. As far as you can recall, what did you
bring? What possessions did you bring? I had a
footlocker. and I think everything I owned was in
that footlocker. Did you bring many civilian
clothes at all? I didn't have any civilian, I mean I
had I had five pair of Levi's and I had five because
that way my mother only had to wash once a week and
mostly For graduation, I got white shirts,
short-sleeved, from John's Dry Goods in
Henrietta, Texas. So I had a few white
short-sleeved shirts, two pair of cowboy boots.
It went a long time in my life not knowing that you
could cut boots off and make shoes out of them. And
those Levi's, and that was about it. Did you bring a
radio or a record player? I had a little sort of
table record player, which my dad had bought at
Second Monday in Bowie some years before. Didn't
have many records, but brought what I had. My
sophomore roommate, by the way, had a brother who
had a great jazz collection, and so I became a jazz
fan during my sophomore year. But that was sort of
what you did. You accumulated around what
everybody brought, but not many possessions. I
think... I believe I had an oscillating fan too,
which became fairly important in those old norms
that didn't have any air conditioning. When did
you get assigned to a room? Was it before fish camp
or after?
I think I came and put my stuff in the room when I
arrived, and then left maybe that same day.
Describe for an observer how one got broken into
the Corps in those days. Well, I had a little bit of
an awakening because I wasn't, although I knew,
one of the things I remember, and I think I still
have it somewhere, was I got a fish handbook. that
was produced by the YMCA. and that came to me
sometime between the agreement to come and
showing up and it had stuff in there like what do you
call the food and how do you you know what what's
whip out mean all that stuff so you're sort of
figuring this out a little bit but not very much
because as you make your way into the dorm you know
you're looking for help you got a foot locker that
weighs 60 pounds or something you're trying to get
to the fourth floor And all of a sudden, people
start yelling at you for no good reason. You know,
you just showed up. And they begin to give you
instructions in a rather forceful manner.
My freshman company commander was a guy named
Charlie Fisher from Cuero. And Charlie was a guy
who was, he was probably the, of the models you
could have, he was more the gentle type. And that
whole senior class was a good senior class, smart
people I remember, many of them. That'd be class of
64? That'd be the class of 64. The classes sort of
got worse as you went down in time. And I'm counting
my own in that group. The juniors were probably not
as good a quality. The sophomores were worse. And
we were just a bunch of ragtags.
And the first sergeant was a guy named Robert
Parker, and he was really quite the opposite of
Charlie Fisher. So, you know, what I remember
about it is, and also I remember meeting my fish old
lady, a fellow named Fred Youngman from Rio Medina
over near San Antonio. First time I'd really ever
been around a good Catholic boy. In fact, one of my
first memories in the room was the first night we
spent together in the room. It had been a rather
hectic day. I was in the top bunk, had just gone to
bed. Fred had stayed up to study, had his desk lamp
on. and i was in that little period when you're half
asleep but not quite i woke startled and noticed he
was on his knees next to the bed and i thought he was
sick and i started saying fred fred are you okay
fred are you okay and he looked up and he said i'm
praying
I think for survival, but it just had never
occurred to me to get on your knees as he had done and
pray. So that was an early introduction to
diversity, let's put it that way. And this was
Company C? C-1. C-1. What was the nickname? Saber
C. Saber C. Or C-Troop Jocks. It was an old cavalry
outfit, in fact, where— other than the Ross
Volunteers, we're the only outfit to wear yellow.
We wore yellow, whatever you call those things,
mascots. And what else was distinctive about it as
C Troop thought about itself? Oh, again, it was...
The person who came, one of the things I noticed
about A&M early on was everybody was from Houston.
You know, you show up from a little town of
Henrietta, everybody you meet on the campus, it
seemed like, was from Houston, which was like a
foreign land to me. But in our little outfit, most
of those boys were from places like Merkle and
Aspermont and Fate and, you know, Schulenburg and
Weimar. And to have someone from Houston was a
rarity because, again, we were an ag outfit, and
what they did is they stashed all of the old ag boys
in there. As a result, collectively, there was not
a lot of brain power in the outfit. It was just a
collection of good old boys. And as a result, our
activities and our fun tended to revolve around
things that country boys would do.
My junior roommate was a fellow from Dallas. And he
was, by today's standards, or those days
standards, a sophisticate. And then we had a
couple of guys come in as frogs from houston who i
guess they didn't have any other place to put them
they put them in our outfit and they were both sort
of city boys with money which we didn't and it
turned out to be if they survived that transition
they were really good guys and these were and this
is mid-september Yeah, we started actually I
guess about September the 15th or so. In those
days, you started later. And one of the memories,
by the way, of the first week was there must have
been a tropical depression or hurricane in the
Gulf. And I came from where it hadn't rained since,
you know, usually there was one rain midsummer. it
started raining the day we got here and it rained
for about ten straight days I thought I had never
seen so much water in all my life and we before you
know the other memory of the first week or so as soon
as you got here they hauled you over by marching you
to the old property warehouse, military property
warehouse, which was in the shadow of the water
tower. And you would get in line, and you'd walk
down the line, and there were these old guys
probably from the Brazos bottom that had been
doing this for 1,000 years, and they'd look at you
and go, and they'd throw you some khakis. I mean,
and all they were trying to do was sort of get it
within maybe six or eight inches of correct. You
get back to the dorm, put these things on, and they
were hanging all over you. So there were places all
around the campus, park cleaners are still over
here, that you had to then find your way to those
places to get those uniforms fitted Because you
couldn't, I mean, there wasn't any, you didn't go
down and think about it and try it on and all that
stuff. They just threw it to you. You stuffed it in a
duffel bag and hoped that you could get it close.
Well, that was traumatic because you were in
little dressing rooms with these curtains that
pulled back and forth. It was September in Bryan
College Station. No place was air conditioned.
Mm-hmm. By the time you got the khakis on, they were
wilted. So it was really, that part I do not
remember fondly, believe me. Describe how the
sophomores and the other members of the Corps got
you guys straightened out and acclimated to
the... There was probably... Oh, and I know you
know the routine, typically up at 6 with on the
wall, which we called on the wall by 620. And at that
point in time, you went through inspections. If
you weren't the whistle jockey, if you were the
whistle jockey, you started a lot earlier.
because you were responsible for running three
cycles of waking everybody up. People must have
been very hard to wake up because that was loud and
rather disruptive to your own schedule. But
during the time you were on the wall, you were
intensely scrutinized with regard to your
appearance, your uniform, your brass, you know
another thing was they gave you brass that had the
you know what we call maidenhead it had sprayed on
lacquer and the first thing you had to do was get
that damn lacquer off of it you know you couldn't be
seen with so this was traumatic because none of us
knew how to do that and so part of the training was to
show you how to turn the water on in the sink, run it
till it got so hot that it would melt the sink, and
then put this brass tin in there and run it until you
finally had melted that maidenhead off. And then
you had to shine it. And then you'd have little bits
in the cracks, and they would jump all over you for
that. Then you typically made it downstairs to
formation and off to morning chow. And you never
stopped being inspected or harassed. That was the
official part. And then there was, you know, I
think we might have been here a few days before
class started because we spent a lot of time
marching and learning how to march and all the
proper military courtesy and all that. Had you had
any, you had not been in any kind of military in high
school or anything like that? Not in Henrietta.
Yeah, this is all brand new. All brand new. The only
thing was my brother was in the Navy and he brought
me home a Blue Jackets manual. from and I had worn
that thing out going through it learning about you
know how to fold clothes and all that stuff didn't
have any any real relationship to this but no there
was no military training in high school the
unfortunately in those days Except for call to
quarters, which was right after chow till 10.30.
You know, you were fair game for a sophomore or
anybody else anytime you were in the dorm and
anytime after call to quarters. I mean, they did
tend to protect that three-hour period in there
for study. But any other time, you found little
nooks and crannies around the campus to hide. Such
as? What were those nooks and crannies? Oh, the
library was a favorite. And it sort of bothered
them a little bit because there they could see you
and knew you were there and knew they couldn't get
their hands on you. The MSC was also sort of
protected turf. Spent a lot of time under the wings
of the Medal of Honor winners along that north
portico of the MSC. And, you know, occasionally
you would find a classroom or a building where
there was a little place you could hide out, but
those were the two main things, two main places.
How did you, those courses, your first fall, how
did you select the courses you were taking? I
didn't. I had no, there was no selection. I was
assigned I took 17 hours my freshman's fall
semester, which was considered a light load. And I
was the only freshman in our outfit that was my
distinguished student the fall semester. Why
that's important was It was sort of hard for
everybody to figure out because they didn't see me
studying any more than anybody else did. And I
probably didn't. But what happened was a little
high school where I went, I had an old made English
teacher who was quite good. Didn't know it then. I
understand it now. Had a chemistry teacher who was
a person right out of college. He went to North
Texas, ran track, and was the track coach, but
taught chemistry. but was an extraordinary
teacher. A math teacher named Mr. Beeler,
B-E-E-L-E-R, who had a speech impediment, so all
of his words were hard to understand, but the guy
was a good math teacher. So I came to A&M basically
with an ability to pass that first semester no
problem. Second semester, I hit second semester
chemistry, sort of went the other direction.
Another interesting part of that is I had... I was
color blind. And so one of the things you had to do in
the chemistry lab was to titrate. And I couldn't
tell whenever it turned colors. I just poured
until the chemicals ran out. And then someone else
would have to show me.